=encoding utf-8

=head1 NAME

ud - TrEd extension to display and edit Universal Dependencies

=head1 DESCRIPTION

=head2 Stylesheet

=over 2

=item *

The word form is displayed as a black label of each node, the label is grey
for empty nodes. The part of speech tag is displayed in dark cyan.

=item *

As each non-root node must have a single parent, the dependency type is shown
as a blue label of the child node.

=item *

The lemma is displayed only if it is different from the word form to narrow
the trees.

=item *

If the enhanced dependency is the same as the basic one, it is not shown at
all. If there is an additional dependency, it is shown as an orange curved
arrow with the dependency type shown in magenta near the start of the arrow.
If the basic dependency is not duplicated in the enhanced one, the tree edge
is coloured in cyan instead of grey and is thinner. If the enhanced dependency
has the same parent as the basic one but a different type, the type can be
displayed in two ways: if it begins with the basic type, only the extra
characters are displayed in blue violet, otherwise, it is displayed full in
violet after a slash.

=item *

An expanded contraction is represented by a dashed area covering the
individual words.

=back

=head2 Editing

=over 2

=item *

Dropping node C<a> on node C<b> attaches node C<a> to node C<b>. An enhanced
dependency is created together with the basic one, if an enhanced dependency
existed to the old or new parent, it is removed.

=item *

Dropping node C<a> on node C<b> while pressing C<Control> toggles existence of
an enhanced dependency of node C<a> on node C<b>. If a dependency was created,
the user is asked for its type. This works even when C<a> already is C<b>'s
parent.

=item *

Dropping node C<a> on node C<b> while pressing C<Shift> attaches node C<a> to
node C<b> without creating an enhanced dependency. If an enhanced dependency
existed to the old or new parent, it is removed.

=item *

Pressing C<d> opens a dialog box to edit the current node's dependency type.
If previously an enhanced dependency of the same type as the basic dependency
existed, it is changed together with it, otherwise, it stays unchanged.

=item *

Pressing C<Insert> inserts a new null node as the leftest son of the
current node, the user is asked for its form.

=item *

Pressing C<Control+Right> or C<Control+Left> adds the current node to a
contraction group. If none of the neighbouring nodes is in a group, a new
group is created and the user is asked for its form. If the nodes are already
in a group, the group is deleted.

=item *

Pressing C<l>, C<f>, and C<p> edits lemma, features, and POS, respectively.

=back

=head1 INSTALLATION

Select the extension in TrEd via Setup -> Manage Extensions -> Get New
Extensions.

=head1 LICENCE (MIT)

Copyright 2018-2025 Jan Štěpánek

Permission is hereby granted, free of charge, to any person obtaining
a copy of this software and associated documentation files (the
"Software"), to deal in the Software without restriction, including
without limitation the rights to use, copy, modify, merge, publish,
distribute, sublicense, and/or sell copies of the Software, and to
permit persons to whom the Software is furnished to do so, subject to
the following conditions:

The above copyright notice and this permission notice shall be
included in all copies or substantial portions of the Software.

THE SOFTWARE IS PROVIDED "AS IS", WITHOUT WARRANTY OF ANY KIND,
EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO THE WARRANTIES OF
MERCHANTABILITY, FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE AND NONINFRINGEMENT.
IN NO EVENT SHALL THE AUTHORS OR COPYRIGHT HOLDERS BE LIABLE FOR ANY
CLAIM, DAMAGES OR OTHER LIABILITY, WHETHER IN AN ACTION OF CONTRACT,
TORT OR OTHERWISE, ARISING FROM, OUT OF OR IN CONNECTION WITH THE
SOFTWARE OR THE USE OR OTHER DEALINGS IN THE SOFTWARE.

=head1 ACKNOWLEDGEMENT

Development of this extension was supported by Czech Science Foundation,
Grant #16-10185S (Non-native Czech from the Theoretical and Computational
Perspective).

=cut
